---
title: "Why I Stopped Using Windows"
date: 2020-08-29T12:21:14-05:00
tags:
  - Opinion
  - Narrative
---

Before we begin, a confession, I used to really like Windows, I admit that it was an "ignorant bliss" kind of thing, but back then I didn't really know much better. I used it often and started liking it even more when I began using some of it's more hidden, "power user oriented" features, such as the built in window management and multitasking capabilities. And while I did have quite a good time in my years using Windows, reality dawned on me in early 2020. I began noticing many things that were just unacceptable about an operating system that makes up the vast majority of the market share that it is in, while also costing a considerable amount more than it's competitors. Some of the reasons were mere annoyances, others were ethical concerns. Not only that, I had started learning more and more about an alternative to Windows, more on that later though. In this article I plan on talking in more detail about this, why I decided to stop using Microsoft's operating system and moved on to something far, far better.

**To those of you more advanced readers, let me clarify beforehand that I am discussing this topic from a more casual viewpoint, so you won't hear me talking about the flaws in the NT kernel or anything else regarding foundation Windows 10, this is meant to be an experience that is relatable to the average user.**

## What's wrong with Windows?

I will divide this subsection into 5 categories and talk about them separately:
  1. [Slow, bloated interface, terrible UI design](http://co1ncidence.github.io/posts/why-i-stopped-using-windows/#slow-bloated-interface-terrible-ui-design)
  2. [Many security and privacy issues, constant spying from Microsoft](http://co1ncidence.github.io/posts/why-i-stopped-using-windows/#many-security-and-privacy-issues-constant-spying-from-microsoft)
  3. [Software base being almost completely proprietary](http://co1ncidence.github.io/posts/why-i-stopped-using-windows/#software-base-being-almost-completely-proprietary)
  4. [Lack of control over system, too much going on without user consent](http://co1ncidence.github.io/posts/why-i-stopped-using-windows/#lack-of-control-over-system-too-much-going-on-without-user-consent)
  5. [TLDR](http://co1ncidence.github.io/posts/why-i-stopped-using-windows/#tldr)

### Slow, bloated Interface, terrible UI design

> Since design is a subjective topic, this section will be regarded as the "least important", some will agree with what I say but some might not, keep this in mind as you read.

One of the things that I noticed while using Windows on a daily basis was just how terrible the design could be sometimes. It felt like there was no real effort put into the interface of Windows. I was constantly changing the look & feel of my system using 3rd party programs like theme patchers to make the experience even tolerable. Buttons are misaligned all over, there is little consistency to the implementation of animations and other visual effects throughout the desktop, and worst of all, some of the less used interfaces still have design elements from older versions of Windows. One example of this is Microsoft's Outlook email client, which still uses [Windows XP dialogs](https://i.postimg.cc/Rh4gmHG8/Outlook-DV-Settings.jpg) for some of the account settings menus. And if you've dived into the more advanced windows settings like the control panel and device management programs, you've probably seen the Windows 7-esque design used there. What's worse, there isn't much you can do to change these things, since the only real customization options that Microsoft provides are:
  - Changing the desktop wallpaper
  - Arranging desktop icons
  - Adding items (only launchers so far) to the Taskbar
  - Changing the single accent color, which only a few Windows Apps actually use
  - And some small changes to the arrangement of items in the Start Menu/Taskbar

And along with being terribly designed, the interface of Windows is also slow and considerably bloated. Most interfaces are unintuitive and slow to react, and some animations feel as if they take forever to finish. Now don't get me wrong, neat effects and transitions are fine, but when done wrong, as they are here, they make getting anything done fast much harder than it should be, for example, just opening the Start menu can take quite a bit of your time. And speaking of the Start menu, not only is it slow, it provides no helpful features at first glance and requires you to spend considerable time scrolling or searching to actually find anything. The search feature is also very slow, taking forever to find files and programs on your system. Furthermore, the Start Menu is [littered with ads and publications](https://i.postimg.cc/FK45KDsW/ads-in-Windows-10-start-menu.png), which are put there without any user consent whatsoever. All of these features actually end up causing harm as well. Microsoft's developers have implemented almost no optimization into their interface, so even simple operations use up ridiculous amounts of system resources. Even just idling your Windows desktop after boot uses up a whopping 1.4-2.0 gigabytes of RAM and anywhere from 15-40 percent of your CPU, depending on the strength of your hardware of course. This not only makes Windows a torturous experience to use on weaker machines, but also slows some of them down by a noticeable amount. It doesn't end there, however. If you were to look closer at some of the Windows 10 UI, you would find many misaligned texts, badly placed lines, boxes out of order, and so on. The Windows user interface is an absolute mess, and while normally I wouldn't take bad design so personally, Microsoft charges 120 dollars for a license to use their operating system. For the amount of money a user would be dishing out for this, it's very hard for me to say that the experience is worth it.

### Many security and privacy issues, constant spying from Microsoft

It is well known how easy it is to create viruses and harmful malware for Windows computers. Due to the amount of market share the operating system has, the vast majority of hackers have no reason to worry about targeting anything else, since so many of their targets are vulnerable on Windows. And to add one to this, Microsoft has a history of being slow with security updates and sometimes takes far too long to find solutions to some [very critical issues](https://www.forbes.com/sites/daveywinder/2020/04/15/windows-10-security-alert-as-microsoft-confirms-seven-critical-vulnerabilities/#2008829625bf). And until maybe this year at most, the inbuilt security of Windows was also very ineffective, with "Windows Defender" doing almost nothing to protect your computer, and, in some cases, is a hindrance to the usability of your machine. And alongside having terrible security, Microsoft also takes advantage of it's hundreds of millions of users and gathers their data. The ironic thing however, is that they do this completely legally. Microsoft themselves state in their [Privacy Statement](https://privacy.microsoft.com/en-us/privacystatement) that they do, in fact, legally reserve the right to track and analyze whatever we do on our computers, and since most user's don't bother to read these documents, this stays under the radar. If you don't want to read the privacy statement, here is a short excerpt which sums up the situation quite well:

> Finally, we will access, disclose and preserve personal data, including your content (such as the content of your emails, other private communications or files in private folders), when we have a good faith belief that doing so is necessary to:

> 1: Comply with applicable law or respond to valid legal process, including from law enforcement or other government agencies;

> 2: Protect our customers, for example to prevent spam or attempts to defraud users of the services, or to help prevent the loss of life or serious injury of anyone;

> 3: Operate and maintain the security of our services, including to prevent or stop an attack on our computer systems or networks; or

> 4: Protect the rights or property of Microsoft, including enforcing the terms governing the use of the services – however, if we receive information indicating that someone is using our services to traffic in stolen intellectual or physical property of Microsoft, we will not inspect a customer’s private content ourselves, but we may refer the matter to law enforcement.

They say that you should always read the fine text, or else you will end up regretting it. That anecdote applies here as well. This was a shocker for me when I first found out about it. Microsoft spies on it's users with complete legal rights and also has a myriad of other perks that it gains once you buy a Windows license, some of which even force you to comply with any legal action that Microsoft might decide to take against. I doubt there is anything more for me to share here, since not much is known about how exactly Microsoft acquires (mostly due to how closed-off the operating system is) this data, we can't exactly track down or opt out of a lot of these programs.

### Software base being almost completely proprietary

If you are someone who uses many different kinds of software, you have probably experienced the frustration that comes with finding good free and open source software on Windows. It's just plain hard to find good software. Since the proprietary giants like Microsoft, Google, Adobe, and others have extended their vice grip over the platform to the point that not using their software is an almost objective disadvantage in some cases. And where there is software available, much of it simply cannot compete with the proprietary alternatives. Not only is installing good software hard, a lot of the terrible software on a Windows computer comes preinstalled, and furthermore, the user can't even do anything about it. Some good examples of this is Microsoft's suite of office applications (which constantly bug you with subscription offers) and collection of basic software like Photos and Groove Music. There are even games and advertisements that are on put computer at the same time as your Windows Installation. None of this software is open source and little is known about the true purpose of some of it. All of this makes Windows an especially frustrating experience to use for anyone who (sensibly) isn't willing to dish out big bucks for basic software or computer tools, most of which fail to be worth their price and are usually bloated and slow. Some examples of these can be (once again), Microsoft's Office Suite, Adobe's Acrobat Tools, subscriptions for any "premium utility" and many other productivity apps you frequently hear about. A more concerning topic, however, is that this proprietary mindset has managed to spread into one of the most delicate regions of Windows software, Anti-Viruses. Most free ones are nearly the verge of being useless and demand far too many system resources. Avast, for example, can cause even my (fairly) fast computer to slow down a noticeable amount. The same thing happens with other "background protection services" from organizations like Malwarebytes and McAfee. Most of them just run pointlessly in the background and slow down your computer. And since many other important settings and utilities are hidden away from the user (see next subsection), other companies can use this to sell software that does things already available in Windows. An example of this is partition management tools, most users are unaware of utilities like `diskpart` and the Windows Partition manager, this results in many partition management apps being marketed, a lot of which, ironically, are just frontends for Windows' built-in partition management system. In short, the current state of Windows and proprietary software is not great, and it doesn't bode well for the future either. Since as more and more of these tech giants demolish their smaller free and open-source rivals, Windows becomes more of a trap for it's current users.

### Lack of control over system, too much going on without user consent

Windows seems to be designed to be as unintuitive and unusable as possible, with as little control being given to the user as possible whenever there is a chance. You can't control or delay (up to a certain extent) Windows updates, nor can you uninstall most of the programs that come with the computer. This gets more and more annoying as Windows updates come and go, since even if you do manage to debloat your system a little bit, all of those apps get reinstalled when the next update comes around. These updates are a pretty big nuisance as well. You can barely delay them for a limited time, and when they do come, they can take up to 6 hours to finish and leave your system in an unusable state during the entirety of that time, and due to their suddenness, some apps may not work for a bit after a recent Windows Update. What is also concerning is the lack of any documentation on the many processes that are always running in the background when you are using your system, most are labeled inconspicuously and don't let the suer know of their purpose. Customization options are also lacking, and changing things like the default Windows keybindings is almost impossible without doing some quite legitimate hacking, and even then, your options are very limited. In short, you are very limited with what you are allowed to do on Windows, this leads it to be an operating system that promotes lazy workflow habits and inefficiency out of the box. Especially for users who don't want to spend hours trying to find out how to change a few small things.

### TLDR

In it's entirety, Windows 10, which costs 120 dollars, seems like quite a bad deal, mostly because it is one. I don't blame people for using it, however. These days almost no marketing is given to Windows alternatives. This allows Microsoft to control and manipulate as large of a percentage of the desktop market share as it possibly can. And with it's terrible workflow and features, Windows normalizes lazy computer habits and also makes users indifferent to any alternatives, as it won't be "what they're used to". The proprietary nature of the operating system is also concerning. Most Windows users know close to nothing about the internals of the machine **that they themselves use every day.** This is becoming the norm more and more, and sooner or later no one will worry about what goes on behind the scenes on the system that virtually their entire life depends upon. Add this to the 6 hour long sudden updates, constant abuse and intrusion on user privacy, slow and bloated user interface, bad treatment of users and there software, and Windows really starts to look like a terrible operating system. Hope hasn't been lost yet, however, since there are still many alternatives to Windows available for everyone to try, one of them being Linux.

## Now, Why is Linux any better?
This subsection too, will be divided into these categories:
  1. No single operating systems, many distributions to choose from for virtually any purpose
  2. UI and design has infinite customization potential, there is virtually no limit, and thus, no complaint
  3. Completely open and secure, everything is known to the user, no corporate ownership
  4. Completely open source and free software base, almost too many options to choose from sometimes
  5. Absolute control over system, nothing is inaccessible to the user

### Many distributions to choose from for almost any purpose

Most people who use Windows have absolutely no idea of the code that was used to create the operating system that they use, everything is hidden away in binaries and the original Windows disk image. The case with Linux is nowhere near this, if you wanted to, you could go right now and [view every line of code](https://github.com/torvalds/linux) in the Linux Kernel yourself, perhaps even get into a nice conversation with one of the many community based maintainers of it. Though what you see there is not going to be the Linux that you use, it is simply the kernel that "Distributions" are built upon. When choosing between these distros, you have almost infinite options. Want something stable and reliable for something like a server? Try Debian Stable or OpenSUSE. Like living on the edge and having the latest features and software? Give Arch Linux a try. Interested in Gaming and and easy to use interface? Try System76's POP_OS!. And, if you just want something that works out of the box and gives you a usable and customizable system, try anything like Zorin, Solus, Ubuntu, Manjaro, Linux Mint or hundreds of other choices. There is a distro for almost any purpose, making Linux one of the most extensible, reliable, and usable operating systems ever. The main point here is not just how many features you have, it's that you are provided complete choice and control over your computer and what you install on it. Something that Windows is notorious for not providing.

### UI and design has infinite customization potential

Linux offers an almost absurd collection of different desktop environments and window managers, each being completely different and having their own upsides and downsides. There, quite literally, is something for everyone's workflow. If you are still skeptic of what I am saying, check out some of the desktops on [r/unixporn](https://reddit.com/r/unixporn), you'll be fascinated by some of the things that are possible. And for those of you who don't want to spend hours configuring your system, don't worry, desktop environments like [GNOME](https://www.gnome.org/) and [KDE](https://kde.org/) are designed to be optimized right out of the box, with many beautiful and simple to install themes available to the user. Looking for something similar to the Windows UI? Try out [Cinnamon](https://github.com/linuxmint/Cinnamon), another desktop environment designed with the newly converted Windows user in mind. Have a slower computer? Try giving [Xfce](https://xfce.org/) and [lxqt](https://lxqt.github.io/) a try, both of which are targeted towards weaker machines. Or, even better, go minimalist with a Window Manager (like me), and find your workflow and efficiency reach new heights. All of the things that I have mentioned also treat your computer far better then windows UI, with the only thing coming close being the massive GNOME, which can use up to 900mb of ram, still trivial compared to what Windows uses. I could go on for hours about the how amazing user interfaces on Linux are, but I'm sure you get the point, there is almost no competition here.

### Completely transparent and secure

One of the main problems that windows had was it's corporate ownership. Almost everything that Microsoft did for the operating system and/or it's users had a financial incentive behind it. Now while this isn't inherently a bad thing (companies have to make money somehow), the methods Microsoft employed aren't the most ethical and this have made many users, including me, look for something more morally sound. Linux provides exactly that. With most of it's distributions being community owned and supported, almost every line of code can be verified to be non malicious. Some distributions are owned by corporations as well, notably enterprise ones like [RHEL(), these, however, are still completely open source and secure, and are intended for more professional use cases. Either way, choice is once again given to the user, if one distribution feels uncomfortable, you have dozens more to choose from. Distributions and their communities are also completely open about their development processes and bugs, and are constantly working together to solve these problems and further stabilize the distributions. Nothing is hidden from users, leading to far more interaction and active development.

### Free and Open Source software base

Linux has always, and does still, pride itself on being a completely open and free operating system. On top of that, the Linux Community has also done a fantastic job of making sure that all software that is on Linux is also Free and Open-source. This includes drivers, firmware, and even system utilities for many systems.

### Absolute control over system

Linux distributions allow root access to the system by default. And there are dozens of built in utilities that let the user access, change, or remove anything they want from the system. While this can be dangerous if the user is not aware of what they are doing, it also gives immense amounts of freedom of control to anyone using the system. You can uninstall or install any application you want any time. All dependencies and requirements are available to you via the package manager. You have full access to the entirety of the Linux Filesystem, and can manually configure any program by hand if you so wish. Linux is friendly to both advanced and new users, with many concepts being simple and intuitive to understand. Instead of having to deal with downloading and installing programs (and worrying about viruses), all software is managed via your distro's "package manager", which, of course, is under your control.

## Final note
